This is chapter 3 in our continuing project in relation to the race riots in Wales in
1919. Chapter 23. Bolshevism. The thing the Allies feared.
The Russian Revolution was a period of political and social revolution across the territory
of the Russian Empire, commencing with the abolition of the monarchy in 1917 and concluding
in 1923 after the Bolshevik establishment of the Soviet Union, which included the national
states of Ukraine, Azerbaijan and others and the end of the civil war.
The final collapse of the Russian monarchy began during the First World War with the
February 1917 revolution that was focused in and around Petrograd, which is now St.
Petersburg, and at the time was the capital of Russia. This revolution erupted in the
context of Russia's major military losses during the war, which resulted in much of
the Russian army being ready to mutiny. In the chaos, members of the Duma, Russia's
parliament assumed control of the country, forming the Russian Provisional Government.
This was dominated by the interests of large capitalists and the noble aristocracy, even
though the monarchy had lost control. Grassroots community assemblies, called Soviets,
which were dominated by soldiers and the urban industrial working class, initially permitted
the Provisional Government to rule. But the Bolsheviks, led by Vladimir Lenin, gained
substantial influence in the Soviets. Lenin campaigned for an immediate end of Russia's
participation in the war, granting land to the peasants and providing bread to the urban
workers. When the Provisional Government chose to continue fighting the war with Germany,
the Bolsheviks and other socialist factions used that to advance the revolution further.
The term Bolshevik, by the way, comes from the Russian word Bolshinsvo, which means majority.
The Bolsheviks ultimately became the Communist Party of the Soviet Union. The Bolsheviks,
or Reds, came to power in Russia during the October Revolution phase of the Russian Revolution
in 1917, and they founded the Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic, RSFSR. The
derogatory terms we often now hear for workers come from the West's feeling about that group.
Terms such as Bolsheviks, workers, Reds, or Pinkos. The revolutions of 1917 to 1923 were
a revolutionary wave that included political unrest and revolts around the world, inspired
by the success of the Russian Revolution and the disorder created by the aftermath of World
War I. The uprisings were mainly socialist or anti-colonial in nature. Many attempted
socialist revolts failed to have a long-term impact. The Bolsheviks actively sought to
encourage and support these revolts, including active participation in the British trade
unions via the Communist Party. Many French soldiers mutinied in 1917 and refused to join
the enemy. In Bulgaria, many troops mutinied and the Bulgarian Tsar stepped down. Mass
strikes and mutinies occurred in Austria, Hungary, and the Habsburg Monarchy, and it
collapsed. In Germany, the November Revolution of 1918 threatened to overtake Germany, but
eventually failed because the army decided to support the government. The German army
faced various mass strikes. Greece succumbed to a coup d'etat in 1922. Turkey experienced
a successful war of independence. Across the world, various other protests and revolts
occurred from the turmoil of World War I and the success of the Russian Revolution. In
the UK, the trade union, Triple Alliance, was a real concern for the British government.
They felt strongly that the unions were being affected by Bolsheviks within. Before the
war, the mines, railways, and docks had been privately owned, but in 1914, under a threat
of war, they were nationalized. This meant in 1919, the three most powerful groups of
workers, the Triple Alliance, were actually working for the state. These workers had
been receiving a bonus during the war and had increased their working hours, but the
wages were reduced in 1919. In February 1919, the three union leaders from the three main
Triple Alliance groups, that's coal, rail, transport, and docks, were invited to attend
Downing Street to have tea with Prime Minister Lloyd George. Strikes had doubled after the
war across all industries, including teaching, and the government could not be sure the army
would suppress action. After all, the army was not going to be able to suppress action.
The army itself had succumbed to various mutinies. According to the miners' representative,
according to one of the delegates, Robert Smiley, which was confirmed by Aneurin Bevan,
the Prime Minister said the following to them,
His argument was simple and clear at a time when states were near collapse across Europe.
If the unions won, the state and government would collapse. So would the Triple Alliance
be ready for a collapse of authority that meant they would effectively be in charge,
be the government? At that point, the leaders of the unions were made fully aware that if
they wanted Bolshevism, it was theirs. But this was not a vision they wanted. They were
simply negotiating for better conditions and wages, and their positions rested on their
relationship with government and employers. So they went back to their unions, not wanting
the government to collapse. The railway workers had demanded a strike by March. The railway
executive had refused the National Union of Railway Workers' demands, prompting the union's
special general meeting, SGM, to express its quote, utmost disgust, unquote, and to vote
43 to 19 to ask the Triple Alliance partners to make a decision.
The NUR leaders were not keen on this course of action, and together with the Trans War
and miners union leaders decided against the national strike. Instead they met the Minister,
Bonne Law, who made some concessions to the railwaymen, guaranteed working hours, minimum
rest period, and a weeks paid holiday. On the 27th of March, the NUR special general
meeting voted 41 to 19 not to go ahead with strikes because of progressing talks, a phrase
familiar to rail union members to this day. Those talks would continue for six months,
while the government prepared to defeat the inevitable strike, but the union leaders prepared
to avoid it rather than win it. Like the NUR, the miners federation let the government persuade
it to postpone action. Lloyd George appointed the Sankey Commission to investigate working
conditions and ownership of the coal industry, promising to implement its findings. After
a preliminary report on 20th of May, the Sankey report delivered its full verdict on 20th of
June, favoring nationalization, a 20% pay rise and one hour off the miners working day.
A month later, the government had taken only one measure, announcing that the maximum time
that miners were to work underground would be cut from eight to seven hours. The miners
federation did not act, still trusting the government to honor the Sankey report, but
rank and file members were not so naive and patient. In mid July, an unofficial strike
spread from Kent and South Wales to Staffordshire, Derbyshire, Yorkshire, the Northeast and Scotland,
but without the support of their union, who held strike funds, the strikes came to an
end in mid August. However, none of this helped black people because the unions wanted their
jobs and they were a useful target for disillusioned workers. One of the reasons there was not
enough work was the high number of strikes crippling an already damaging economy. The
relatively few jobs taken by black people would have made little difference to the high
level of post-war unemployment. However, the fear of them being radicalized was a different
matter for the government. For that reason, controlling them and removing them was something
the government was in favor of. The problem was the legislative position made that difficult.
They were British citizens, but in an environment where the press placed the blame fully upon
black people, the riots provided the smokescreen of public demand. This smokescreen would be
commonly used from 1919 onward by the British government.